Highlight & Summarize:
RAG without the jailbreaks

Abstract—Preventing jailbreaking and model hijacking of
Large Language Models (LLMs) in question answering chatbots
is remarkably challenging. When interacting with a chatbot,
malicious users can craft prompts that cause the LLM to generate
undesirable content or perform a different task from its intended
purpose. Existing systems attempt to mitigate this by hardening
the LLM’s system prompt or using additional classifiers to detect
undesirable content or off-topic conversations. However, these
probabilistic approaches are relatively easy to bypass due to the
very large space of possible inputs and undesirable outputs.
We present Highlight & Summarize (H&S), a design pattern
for retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems that prevents
these attacks by design. The core idea is to hide the user-provided
question from the answering LLM. This is achieved by splitting
the pipeline into two components: a highlighter, which extracts
verbatim passages from trusted sources that are relevant to
a user’s question, and a summarizer LLM, which takes the
highlighted passages and reorganizes them into a cohesive answer.
By design, an attacker can only exercise limited control on the
summarizer, making it extremely hard to bypass and provably
resilient to model hijacking. We evaluate several instantiations of
the H&S pattern, and observe it has a minimal utility impact on
non-reasoning tasks, making it suitable for FAQ-based chatbots.
Further, because the H&S design enforces that answers are based
on text extracts from the knowledge sources, it even shows some
advantages w.r.t. conventional RAG in groundedness and refusing
to answer when no information is available.
Index Terms—retrieval-augmented generation, prompt injection, model hijacking, system-level defenses

I. I NTRODUCTION
Retrieval-augmented Generation (RAG) is proving to be
a sound and reliable solution for answering questions using
documents from a knowledge base. From customer support
systems to search engines, RAG combines the ability of LLMs
to answer questions expressed in natural language with the
efficiency of vector databases for retrieving information from
large data repositories, to provide a robust production-ready
solution for many applications. The core idea behind RAG is
that, when a user asks a question, the system first retrieves a
set of relevant documents from the knowledge base and passes
these to a generative LLM together with the user’s question;
on this basis, the LLM produces an answer to the question,
which is returned to the user.
One of the most widely-deployed classes of RAG applications is customer service chatbots, deployed by companies
to answer questions from customers. In this setting, the RAG
knowledge base consists exclusively of the company’s curated
data sources (e.g., official FAQs, policy documents, internal

Fig. 1. An example of model hijacking against Amazon’s chatbot. Source:
https://x.com/jayphelps/status/1810393782149591398.

databases, etc.). The knowledge base is therefore fully trusted,
but the users’ inputs are untrusted and potentially malicious.
In this setting, a malicious user could attack the system
by inputting specially crafted prompts to achieve various
objectives. Firstly, they could try to jailbreak the system to
make the LLM generate offensive content that harms the
reputation of the company. A more subtle jailbreak is to trick
the LLM into generating unintended outputs that misrepresent
the company’s intent, for example, persuading the chatbot
to offer discounts on the company’s products; a documented
case shows that the chatbot’s output may constitute a legally
binding statement from the company (section II).
A related and increasingly popular threat is model hijacking [1], whereby a malicious user repurposes the chatbot’s
generative LLM to perform other tasks (e.g., Figure 1). This
can be highly beneficial to attackers, who can use a company’s
LLM resources to their own benefit, without having to pay for
the used tokens. We provide real-world examples in section II.
Overall, the owner of the RAG system aims to prevent
it from being used for anything other than direct question
answering based on the trusted knowledge base. It is even
undesirable for the LLM to perform its own reasoning, as this
could lead to incorrect conclusions or be abused by attackers.
In this paper, we introduce and evaluate Highlight & Summarize (H&S), a new design pattern for RAG systems that
prevents these attacks by design. Our approach consists of
two components (Figure 2): First, the highlighter component

Fig. 2. H&S-enhanced RAG pipeline. A malicious user asking a question to this system cannot jailbreak the LLM, by design.

inspects the retrieved documents and extracts passages from
them that are relevant to answering the user’s question – the
digital equivalent of highlighting those passages; these are
deterministically enforced to be long contiguous passages of
the trusted knowledge base. The highlighter can be instantiated
using existing methods for extractive QA, or using modern generative LLMs. Secondly, the summarizer component,
which is an LLM, generates a coherent answer by summarizing the highlighted passages. Crucially, the summarizer
never sees the user’s question. Because of this design, the
attacker can only influence the generative LLM (summarizer)
by providing verbatim quotes from trusted documents; this
prevents them from arbitrarily controlling the pipeline’s output
text, thereby fully mitigating model hijacking and making
jailbreaks substantially harder (section VI).
We study the security guarantees mathematically (with an
accompanying Lean formalization) showing how H&S exponentially decreases the control that an attacker can exercise
over the QA pipeline. We show that H&S thwarts all nonadaptive attacks from a large prompt injection dataset, as
well as a strong novel adaptive highlighting attack specifically
designed to challenge this technique.
We introduce several variants of the H&S design and
evaluate their response accuracy on two popular question
answering (QA) datasets: RepliQA and BioASQ. Our results
show that H&S has a small utility impact compared with a
standard RAG implementation. In pairwise evaluations, the
strongest H&S variant trails Vanilla RAG’s adjusted win rate
by just one percentage point on both RepliQA (61% vs 62%)
and BioASQ (69% vs 70%). Although Vanilla RAG achieves
higher correctness, some H&S variants are better at declining
to answer unanswerable questions, suggesting that H&S can
also improve groundedness as a byproduct (Table IV).
Our contributions
We present Highlight & Summarize, the first RAG system
design pattern to mitigate jailbreaking by design.
• We formalize the security guarantees of H&S, and we
evaluate it against both non-adaptive and adaptive attacks.
• We introduce several H&S variants, and show that they
have a minimal performance impact on non-reasoning
•

tasks (e.g., FAQ-based QA).
To enable further analysis of H&S, we release both code
and experimental data (see Open Science appendix).
II. R EAL - WORLD MOTIVATING EXAMPLES
The threats that motivate H&S are not hypothetical. Below
we report documented incidents that illustrate the two classes
of attacks we aim to prevent: jailbreaks that lead to offensive or
misleading outputs, and model hijacking that allows attackers
to repurpose a company’s chatbot.
A. Jailbreaks and misleading answers
Notoriously, LLM-based chatbots can be manipulated to
produce offensive outputs, thereby causing reputational damage, as well as a detrimental societal impact. For instance, the
parcel-delivery company DPD had to disable part of its support
chatbot after a frustrated customer prompted it to swear and
to compose a poem criticizing DPD [2]. In another case, a
prankster convinced the ChatGPT-powered sales chatbot of a
Chevrolet dealership to “agree” to sell a new Chevrolet Tahoe
for $1, with the bot calling it “a legally binding offer” [3].
While the Chevrolet “sale” was a prank that the dealership
never honored, there are cases where a chatbot’s answers
are considered to be legally binding, as demonstrated by the
Air Canada case. In 2024, a Canadian tribunal ordered Air
Canada to compensate a customer after its support chatbot
gave incorrect information about fares [4]. The airline argued
that the chatbot was a “separate legal entity” responsible for
its own actions; the tribunal rejected this, holding the company
accountable for all information on its website, whether served
through a static page or a chatbot. This shows how a single
generated answer can constitute a binding commitment on
behalf of the operator. Importantly, a malicious user could take
advantage of this by deliberately provoking such an outcome.
B. Model hijacking
Another attack, referred to as model hijacking, enables
an attacker to repurpose a company’s chatbot to perform
tasks unrelated to its intended function (e.g., to act as a
coding agent). Through this, the attacker gets free access to
the LLM, while the company is left to cover the resulting

token costs. This is related to LLMjacking attacks, where an
attacker steals LLM providers’ credentials to use the model for
free [5]; differently, model hijacking does not require stealing
credentials, but simple jailbreaking.
Amazon’s shopping assistant Rufus, designed to answer
product questions, was shown to respond to arbitrary, offtopic prompts (Figure 1) [6]. Relatedly, social media posts
suggested that customer service bots of McDonald’s and
Chipotle suffered a similar bypass, and they could be used
for general question answering; this latter case was found to
be fabricated [7], but it signals the scale of the problem.
Unfortunately, defending against these attacks is at odds
with the effort of LLM designers to produce general purpose
models with open-ended task solving capabilities. While alignment training can mitigate some risks, it is not possible to
prevent all attacks via training alone (e.g., [8]).
III. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
a) Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG): The interaction between a user and a typical RAG application is:
1. The user submits a question via a chat-style interface.
2. The application searches its knowledge base and retrieves
documents related to the user’s question.
3. The retrieved documents are concatenated to the user’s
question and the combined text is input into an LLM.
4. The LLM generates a response that is shown to the user.
This type of RAG application is widely used, for example
in customer support services [9], [10]. The benefits of RAG
in such scenarios include the ability to ground the LLM’s
response on company-specific information, reduce hallucinations, and update the knowledge base without retraining the
LLM. However, such systems are still vulnerable to jailbreaking and model hijacking by malicious users.
b) Preventing jailbreaks and model hijacking: Several
techniques have been proposed to detect or prevent jailbreaking of LLM-based systems, including those used in RAG.
The main classes of defenses include: fine-tuning the LLM to
reduce the risk of undesirable output; using defensive system
prompts to increase the difficulty of jailbreaking [11], [12];
applying different types of classifiers to the inputs to detect
potential jailbreaks [13]–[17]; and preprocessing the input to
remove or reduce the impact of potential jailbreaks [14], [18]–
[20]. To mitigate model hijacking [1], [21] (i.e., repurposing
the LLM for a different task), techniques such as NeMo [18]
support programmable guardrails that allow the application
owner to specify dialogue flows by canonicalizing inputs.
Our solution, H&S, takes a completely different approach by
ensuring that the user’s input is never input to the summarizer
LLM.
c) System-level defenses: Similarly to defenses such as
FIDES [22] and CaMeL [23], H&S is a system-level defense
in that it deterministically limits the attacker’s capabilities.
However, H&S focuses on the opposite threat model: whereas
those defenses prevent malicious sources from affecting benign users, in H&S’ threat model the retrieved data is trusted

but the user inputs are not. H&S can be seen as a realization
of the Context-Minimization design pattern [24].
d) Passage retrieval and extractive QA: Passage retrieval
and extractive QA are well-established research fields in
the domain of natural language processing (NLP). Passage
retrieval is the process of extracting from a set of documents
one or more texts that are relevant to answering a question.
Several techniques have been developed, with applications in
the medical and legal sectors [25]–[28]. With a similar goal,
extractive QA aims to select (brief) portions of text from
a larger document in order to answer a question. Extractive
QA methods are largely based on modern NLP architectures,
with BERT-like models being the most successful [29]–[31].
Passage retrieval and extractive QA are typically combined in
practical systems [32], [33]. In H&S, the highlighter works
similarly to extractive QA, and two of the H&S highlighter
instantiations described in section V use extractive QA models.
IV. T HREAT MODEL AND ASSUMPTIONS
Some users of a RAG application may be adversarial.
We assume a strong adversary who has full knowledge of
all the documents in the knowledge base; for example, this
may be the case if the knowledge base consists of published
documentation or FAQ web pages. The adversary is able to
submit arbitrary questions and observe the responses. The
adversary may want to achieve the following goals:
• Repurpose the application to perform a different task. For
example, using a customer service chatbot to summarize
large amounts of text, at the expense of the owner.
• Jailbreak the application and cause it to generate arbitrary
output. This could include content that causes reputational
damage to the application owner, or even constitutes an
unintentional yet legally enforceable commitment from
the application owner.
The goal of the application owner is to prevent both of the
above classes of attacks. We assume the application owner has
inspected all documents in the knowledge base and confirmed
that they contain only trustworthy information. This is a
realistic assumption as the application owner has full control
of the knowledge base and can apply arbitrary preprocessing
and filtering. We do not aim to defend against other types of
attacks on RAG systems, such as extracting information [34],
[35] or poisoning the knowledge base [36]–[38].
V. H IGHLIGHT & S UMMARIZE
We propose H&S, a new design pattern for RAG systems to
mitigate jailbreaking and model hijacking attacks. The main
design principle is that a (malicious) user must be unable
to provide arbitrary inputs to the LLM that generates the
response. We achieve this by separating the generative QA
process into two steps (Figure 2):
• Highlighting: The highlighter component takes the retrieved documents and selects (“highlights”) text passages
from them that are relevant to the user’s question.
• Summarization: The summarizer component takes only
the text selected by the highlighter and summarizes it in

the form of a coherent answer to some question, which is
returned to the user. The user’s question is never shown
to the summarizer.
The following security property is enforced in H&S:
For a security parameter min_words, each of the
text passages returned by the highlighter in an H&S
pipeline must be a contiguous match of at least
min_words words from the trusted documents; furthermore, text extracts must be non-overlapping.
This property is deterministically enforced by the pipeline,
by checking that all outputs of the highlighter are contiguous,
non-overlapping exact matches from the retrieved documents,
and that they contain ≥min_words words each.
By virtue of this design, malicious users are unable to
directly influence the outputs of the system – which are
provided by the summarizer. In section VI, we support this
claim by considering an important class of adaptive attacks
and how they are countered.
a) H&S variants: Since H&S is a new design pattern,
it can be implemented in various different ways. In particular,
there are many ways to implement the highlighter component, ranging from extractive QA models through to prompttuned LLMs. In subsection V-A, we describe five different
implementations of the highlighter. In contrast, the summarizer
is relatively straight-forward, so we present a single implementation in subsection V-B. We call any combination of a
highlighter and summarizer an H&S pipeline.
A. Highlighter implementations
We describe five different highlighter implementations chosen to provide a broad overview of the design space. They
differ in terms of computational overhead and QA capabilities.
a) H&S Baseline: This highlighter is a zero-shot prompttuned LLM that is tasked with extracting relevant information from the retrieved documents. Since the output of the
highlighter LLM might deviate slightly from the exact text in
the retrieved documents (e.g., due to the model’s internal randomness), we use fuzzy string matching between the LLM’s
output and the documents to identify the precise text from the
documents to be highlighted. We use RapidFuzz [39] with
a threshold of 95 in our experiments.
b) H&S Structured: This highlighter improves upon
H&S Baseline by asking the highlighter LLM to first output an
answer to the user’s question and then to highlight the relevant
text from the retrieved documents. We use Azure OpenAI’s
structured output [40] to enforce the format: {“answer”:
str, “text_extracts”: list[str]}.
The generated answer is not passed to the summarizer. We
observed that asking the highlighter LLM to first produce this
output helped with grounding its responses, thereby producing
better highlights from the text. As with H&S Baseline, we
again use fuzzy string matching to ensure that the highlighted
text is taken directly from the retrieved documents.

c) H&S Two Steps: This highlighter enforces the chainof-thought implied in H&S Structured by employing two
separate LLM calls. In the first call, we have an LLM answer
the question; in the second call, the LLM is given the question,
the answer, and the documents, and it is asked to extract the
text needed to answer the question. As with other highlighter
implementations, we ensure that Two Steps returns verbatim
contiguous text from the original document and nothing else.
d) H&S Span: This highlighter only returns the start
and end of the passages to highlight. This has two benefits.
First, it considerably reduces the costs of the pipeline, since
the highlighter LLM outputs considerably fewer tokens than
the other LLM-based highlighters (Figure 11). Secondly, it
simplifies the task of matching the highlighted text against the
document: because only a small part of the document is output,
the LLM is less likely to introduce typos; for this reason, we
did not find it necessary to implement fuzzy matching for the
outputs of H&S Span (the pipeline simply rejected any nonmatching texts).
e) H&S DeBERTaV3: This highlighter is an extractive
QA model from the BERT family. In our experiments, we use
DeBERTaV3 [41], which uses disentangled attention and a better mask decoder to improve upon BERT and RoBERTa. We
use two versions of this model: H&S DeBERTaV3 (SQuAD2)
is a DeBERTaV3 model that was fine-tuned [42] on the
SQuAD2 dataset [43]. Since this model was fine-tuned for
short-span extractive QA, as encouraged by the SQuAD2
dataset, its performance in our experiments was lacking: the
highlighter of an H&S pipeline is best served by a tool that
outputs longer span passages to a question. For this reason,
we also employ H&S DeBERTaV3 (RepliQA), which is
a DeBERTaV3 model that we fine-tuned on the RepliQA
dataset (see section VII). We train the model to return the gold
passage of an answer, rather than the expected answer, which
significantly improves the performance of the H&S pipeline.
Fine-tuning this model on splits 0-2 of the RepliQA dataset
(section VII) took around 7 hours on an NVIDIA A100 GPU.
B. Summarizer implementation
We evaluate one summarizer that is common across all
H&S implementations. The summarizer is a zero-shot prompttuned LLM that is tasked with i) guessing what question the
highlighted text was intended to answer, and ii) reformulating
the highlighted text in form of an answer. Only the answer is
returned to the user. The guessed questions are not returned to
the user – their purpose is to ground the generated answer, and
to aid in evaluation. We use Azure OpenAI’s structured output
option [40], which forces the LLM to give a response matching
a desired format (in this case, {“guessed_questions”:
list[str], “answer”: str}); we found this helps
with the quality of the responses, and allows us to evaluate
what question the LLM guessed. Unless otherwise specified,
we use OpenAI’s GPT-4.1-mini [44], [45].
VI. S ECURITY ANALYSIS
Fundamentally, all forms of jailbreaking and model hijacking attacks involve some type of adversarial input to an LLM,

which causes the LLM to generate undesirable outputs or
perform an unintended task. In the widely-used setting of a
RAG-powered system with a trusted knowledge base, the key
idea of H&S is to ensure that the adversary cannot provide
direct inputs to the generative LLM that produces the final
output (i.e., the summarizer); consequently, this design should
prevent an attacker from controlling arbitrary outputs.
In this section, we first show theoretically that H&S exponentially decreases the control that an attacker can exercise
over the QA pipeline. Then, we show how it thwarts all
non-adaptive attacks from a large prompt injection dataset
(subsection VI-B). Finally, and most importantly, we look into
ways adaptive attackers might evade the security of H&S,
by indirectly influencing the inputs of the generative LLM
through the highlighted text, and we show how enforcing a
min_words security parameter mitigates the vast majority
of them (subsection VI-C).
A. Theoretical analysis
The security of an H&S pipeline comes from the fact that
the inputs to the generative LLM (summarizer) are limited to
being exact contiguous extracts of trusted text documents. This
significantly reduces the ways an attacker can control the LLM
to make it misbehave. We provide a theoretical foundation
to support this intuition. We formulate our analysis upon the
definition of control region of an LLM, which is novel to
the best of our knowledge, and show that H&S exponentially
decreases an attacker’s control of the LLM’s outputs.
H&S prevents arbitrary control.: Formally, an autoregressive generative LLM is a randomized algorithm L : P 7→
∆(O) that maps input prompts (i.e., sequences of tokens) to
a probability distribution over output strings, where ∆(O) is
the space of distributions on O. We use the shortcut notation
P (L(s) = o) to mean PO∼L(s) (O = o), where O is a random
variable with distribution L(s).
We define the control region of an LLM as the set of outputs
that can be obtained with at least probability β > 0.
Definition VI.1 (LLM Control Region). For a parameter β ∈
(0, 1], the control region of an LLM L is:
Cβ (L) = {o ∈ O | ∃p ∈ P : P (L(p) = o) ≥ β}
Intuitively, this captures the set of strings that a user can
reliably obtain as outputs from the LLM (i.e., control with
non-negligible probability) by providing inputs from P. For
example, a user can have an LLM output the string o = “This
is an example” with non-zero probability (in fact, with
high probability with modern instruction-tuned LLMs) by
prompting the LLM with “Output the following
string verbatim and nothing else: This is
an example”. Hence, the sentence o belongs to the control
region for some β > 0.
A very informative result shows that, even for probabilistic
LLMs, the number of possible outputs achievable with nonnegligible probability is bounded by the size of their inputs:

Lemma VI.1 (Bounded control region). The size of the control
region for an LLM is bounded by the size of the input space:
|Cβ (L)| ≤

|P|
.
β

Proofs are deferred to the appendix, which also includes a
reference to Lean formalizations.
The above shows that the number of outputs that one can
control strictly depends on the cardinality of the input set of an
LLM, regardless of the randomness in the algorithm. Because
an H&S pipeline reduces the LLM’s input space (hence, the
output space), from the set of all input tokens P to the set of
contiguous strings, we can informally say that:
An H&S pipeline prevents the attacker from having
arbitrary control over the outputs. That is, it restricts
the outputs that they can obtain from the LLM.
Exponential decrease in control.: We now quantify by
how much H&S decreases the attacker’s control. Suppose
the LLM’s input space is the set of strings of at most K
tokens, P = Σ≤K , where Σ is the set of tokens and K is
the LLM’s token limit. Let us now consider the summarizer
LLM of an H&S pipeline. For a retrieved document D ∈ Σ∗ ,
the highlighting step of H&S is a map hD (P) that returns a
contiguous string from the document D. For simplicity, our
analysis models a single text extract and does not account for
min_words. We expect a similar exponential decrease with
multiple text extracts, as long as min_words is enforced.
An H&S pipeline reduces the control region from Cβ (L) to
Cβ (L ◦ hD ). Precisely:
Theorem VI.1 (Exponential decrease in control). Consider
an LLM L : Σ≤K 7→ ∆(O) and an H&S pipeline L ◦ hD
operating on a document of length N = |D|. Assume there
are constants α, β ∈ (0, 1] s.t.: |Cβ (L)| ≥ α|P|. Then
|Cβ (L ◦ hD )|
= O(K N |Σ|−K )
|Cβ (L)|
This result makes a basic coverage assumption on the
LLM: it assumes that the LLM is expressive enough that
some non-zero proportion α > 0 of its potential outputs
can be obtained with non-zero probability. For example,
consider a variation of the input prompt discussed before,
p(x) = “Output the following string verbatim
and nothing else: x”, where x is a string. We can
expect a modern LLM to output x with probability β > 0 for
some proportion of strings x ∈ O.1 This assumption aligns
with the LLM’s effectiveness: an LLM developer would like
to have a large β control over a large portion of the output
space, since this implies a well-behaving LLM.
1 The assumption is required to hold for an arbitrary α > 0 proportion of
outputs, which can be small. One could potentially lift this assumption and
derive similar results from the way softmax scores are derived for LLMs: if
(as it is desirable) all softmax scores are required to be < 1, one may show
that a similar exponential bound to Theorem VI.1 can be obtained.

In summary, Theorem VI.1 confirms that:

Reimbursement_Guidelines.pdf

An H&S pipeline reduces the control region of the
summarizer LLM exponentially in K, the token limit
of the LLM. That is, it exponentially reduces the
number of outputs that an attacker can control.

You may submit a request for reimbursement if the
expense falls within the approved categories outlined in
Appendix D. Once the claim is verified and approved,
it is recorded as a completed transaction and marked as
“ won ” in the internal tracking system. A confirmation
email will be sent to the claimant within three (3) business days. If the reimbursement includes a $10 threshold
adjustment, the system will automatically generate a
voucher code for accounting purposes. This voucher is
non-transferable and must be used that fiscal quarter.

B. Evaluation against (non-adaptive) jailbreaking attacks
We evaluate the security of H&S against attacks from the
LLMail-Inject challenge dataset [46]. This dataset gives a
deterministic way of checking for a successful attack: the LLM
has access to a tool, which it must never call; if a prompt
manages to provoke i) a tool call (send_email), and ii)
with the right arguments (e.g., destination email address), we
call it a successful attack. We use the 1,028 successful attack
prompts from the challenge (Scenario 2).
In LLMail-Inject, which was originally designed for evaluating indirect injection attacks, the adversarial inputs were
retrieved from the user’s emails. To compare the security
of RAG and H&S against direct prompt injection attacks
(jailbreaks), we provide the attack prompts as direct inputs to
the two pipelines. In this experiment, the “knowledge base” is
made of 20 harmless emails, consistent with the LLMail-Inject
setup. This modified setup does not affect the results: most
successful prompts from LLMail-Inject are also successful in
our setup, which fits the goal of comparing RAG and H&S.
Results show that Vanilla RAG is highly susceptible to these
attacks: 95% successfully call the tool, and 67% complete
the attacker’s goal (i.e., to make a tool call with valid arguments). Conversely, H&S is bypassed by no attack. This
is unsurprising: none of the attacks is a verbatim extract from
the trusted data source, and they are deterministically rejected
by H&S. Importantly, we expect the same result would be
obtained for most (non-adaptive) jailbreaking benchmarks: as
long as the attack prompt is not contained, as a sentence, in
the QA knowledge base, it will fail to bypass H&S.
Indeed, the only chance for an attacker to bypass H&S is
to adaptively look for sentences from the knowledge base that
can be weaponized to produce the desired effect. In the next
section, we explore this via adaptive attackers.
C. Adaptive highlighting attacks
Our threat model (section IV) assumes a strong adversary
with full knowledge of H&S and the contents of the knowledge
base. This attacker could attempt to subvert H&S with the
following adaptive attack, which is somewhat reminiscent of
traditional system attacks such as Return-Oriented Programming (ROP) [47]. For a target injection, the attacker i) browses
the RAG knowledge base to find a document that contains
(most of) the words in the target sentence, ii) causes that
document to be retrieved, and iii) asks the H&S highlighter
to only highlight the desired words. Figure 3 exemplifies this:
if the attacker wants the system to output “You won a $10
voucher”, they could persuade the highlighter to select the
individual words from the retrieved document.

Fig. 3. Adaptive highlighting attack example. This attack is mitigated via
the min_words security parameter, which deterministically rejects short
highlights, further reducing the attacker’s control over the summarizer’s inputs.

While this adversarial highlighting attack is theoretically
possible, it is made extremely challenging thanks to our simple
H&S design constraint: we only allow the highlighter to
highlight non-overlapping, contiguous passages of at least a
certain length min_words. For example, by simply setting
min_words = 5, it is impossible for the attacker to highlight
the sentence “You won a $10 voucher” in Figure 3, which in
turn makes the same attack virtually impossible to succeed.
We look at the effect of min_words in section VIII.
In the context of jailbreaking, H&S transforms the extremely challenging problem of building a classifier that can
judge the intent (whether malicious or not) of any sentence,
to the much simpler task of inspecting long and adjacent
sentences from a knowledge base to see if they could be
weaponized to cause harm. Importantly, this makes it viable to
check in advance whether the knowledge documents contain
any string that may lead to jailbreaks (section X). As for model
hijacking attacks, where a malicious user needs the ability to
query the model with any input, H&S fully mitigates them by
this same design.
VII. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
In the following sections, we evaluate the quality of the
responses of the various H&S pipelines, and compare them
with a vanilla QA LLM in a standard RAG setting. Evaluating
LLMs in QA tasks is notoriously challenging [48]–[53]. We
select datasets that prevent confounding factors (e.g., the
fact that the LLM may not use the context document for
answering), and we employ many evaluation metrics, ranging
from standard to novel ones, to provide a comprehensive
overview of the performance of H&S pipelines.
A. Datasets
When evaluating a generative LLM for RAG pipelines, the
LLM should ground its answers on the documents provided as
context, and not on any of its training data. For example, if a
RAG application is based on policy documents, any answer it

TABLE I
M ETRICS USED FOR EVALUATING INDIVIDUAL H&S COMPONENTS AND THE FULL H&S PIPELINE .
Name

Type

Description

Ref

Recall
K-Precision
Poll Multihop Correctness
Reliable CI Relevance

Token
Token
LLM
LLM

[49]
[49]
[52]
[53]

MTBench Chat Bot Response Quality

LLM

ComparisonJudge

LLM

Proportion of tokens in the reference answer that are present in the model’s response.
Proportion of tokens in the model’s response that are present in the gold passage.
Correctness of a generated response against a reference answer using few-shot learning.
Relevance of a passage to a query based on a four-point scale: Irrelevant, Related, Highly
relevant, Perfectly relevant.
Quality of the response based on helpfulness, relevance, accuracy, depth, creativity, and level
of detail, assigning a numerical grade.
Compare two answers to the same question and reference answer, and select either a winner,
a tie, or a tie where neither answer is acceptable.

gives must be coming strictly from those documents and not
from other policies the LLM may have memorized in training.
a) RepliQA: To mitigate this confounding factor,
we conduct our main experiments using the RepliQA
dataset [54]. This is a human-created dataset that contains
questions based on natural-looking documents about fictitious
events or people. By doing so, we ensure that performance is
not affected by LLMs’ ability to memorize their training data.
The RepliQA dataset consists of 5 splits (numbered from
0 to 4), which were released gradually over a year. Each split
contains 17,955 examples. In our evaluation, we used the most
recent split (split_3, which was released on April 14th,
2025). This ensures that the LLM we use (GPT-4.1-mini)
was not trained on this data. During data analysis, we observed
10 mislabeled instances in this split, which we corrected
manually.
Each entry in the RepliQA dataset contains a gold passage,
called long_answer, which is a substring of the retrieved
document, selected by a human annotator, that is relevant to
answering the question. We use this field for our performance
measurements, as well as for fine-tuning (on a separate split of
the dataset) a DeBERTaV3 extraction QA model to implement
the H&S DeBERTaV3 (RepliQA) pipeline.
b) BioASQ: We also include experiments based on the
rag-mini-bioasq dataset, henceforth BioASQ, which is
a subset of the training dataset that was used for the BioASQ
Challenge [55]. This dataset contains biomedical questions,
as well as answers and documents. Since we do not use this
dataset for training, we use both the training and test splits for
evaluation, which gives a total of 4,719 samples.
B. Evaluation metrics
We compare each H&S pipeline’s answer with the expected
answer from the dataset using several metrics. We evaluate
the quality of the responses based on three types of evaluation
metrics, as summarized in Table I. We report the costs of H&S
in terms of time-to-respond and token counts in Appendix B.
a) Pairwise comparison judge: We use a zero-shot
prompt-tuned LLM with the task of deciding a “winner”
between two alternative answers to a question. The judge
receives the reference answer so that its preference is grounded
in factual correctness. This judge also has the option to declare
a “tie” between the answers, or to decide that neither answer is

[51]
Ours

acceptable. In our implementation, we randomize the order of
the two answers to mitigate any potential ordering bias. When
both responses are unanswerable, we record a tie directly.
b) LLM-as-a-Judge: We use prompt-tuned LLMs that
rate the responses with respect to various criteria [50], [51].
Specifically, we adopt three standard LLM-as-a-Judge implementations, so as to provide a diverse judgment [51]–[53].
c) Token-based metrics: We use quantitative comparisons between the tokens of the expected answer (or gold passage) and the given answer. Specifically, we use token-based
metrics to evaluate the correctness (“Recall”) and faithfulness
(“K-Precision”), based on the work by Adlakha et al. [49].
VIII. E VALUATING THE FULL H&S PIPELINE
We first evaluate the full H&S pipelines in comparison with
a standard (“vanilla”) RAG system. Since H&S only modifies
the RAG generation step, we hold the retrieval step constant
for each comparison; that is, we compare the pipelines on their
ability to answer questions based on the same set of retrieved
documents. For the utility experiments in this section and the
component ablations that follow, generation and LLM-based
judging use GPT-4.1-mini. We compare the pipelines using
the ComparisonJudge and the LLM-as-Judges, as well as on
their ability to decline when no answer can be provided.
A. Pairwise comparisons
We use the ComparisonJudge to perform direct pairwise
comparisons between all pipelines, including standard RAG.
For each question in our evaluation set, we compare all pairs
of pipeline outputs, resulting in one of three outcomes: a clear
preference for one response, a tie (both equally good), or
neither (both inadequate). For Elo and win-rate calculations,
both tie outcomes are treated as ties.
We compute Elo ratings using pairwise comparisons. The
Elo score, invented in the context of chess for ranking players
based on 1-to-1 matches [56], has recently become a popular
metric for comparing LLMs (e.g., by Chiang et al. [57]). We
use a maximum-likelihood Bradley–Terry model to compute
Elo scores from these pairwise outcomes. We also report win
rate, treating ties as half a win for each model: WinRate =
Wins+0.5×Ties
TotalGames . Elo rankings are in Table II, whereas the full
pairwise results are in Figure 4 and Table X.
Figure 4 and Table II show that the strongest H&S variants
perform close to the Vanilla RAG baseline in terms of both Elo

Elo Score

Win Rate

RepliQA

Vanilla RAG
H&S Structured Highlighter
H&S Span Highlighter
H&S Baseline
H&S Two Steps Highlighter
H&S BERT Extractor (RepliQA)
H&S BERT Extractor (SQuAD2)

1079
1075
1058
1044
1041
916
785

62%
61%
59%
56%
56%
37%
20%

BioASQ

TABLE II
D IRECT PAIRWISE COMPARISON OF ALL PIPELINES BY THE
C OMPARISON J UDGE LLM. E LO SCORES USE A B RADLEY–T ERRY
MAXIMUM - LIKELIHOOD FIT; WIN RATE COUNTS A WIN AS 1, A TIE AS 0.5,
AND A LOSS AS 0.

Vanilla RAG
H&S Two Steps Highlighter
H&S Structured Highlighter
H&S Baseline
H&S Span Highlighter
H&S BERT Extractor (RepliQA)
H&S BERT Extractor (SQuAD2)

1151
1139
1128
1109
861
847
761

70%
69%
67%
65%
31%
29%
19%

rating and win rate. For example, on the RepliQA dataset,
H&S Structured underperforms Vanilla RAG by only 4 Elo
points and one percentage point in win rate, whereas H&S
Two Steps underperforms Vanilla RAG by 12 Elo points and
one percentage point in win rate on the BioASQ dataset.
Interestingly, some H&S variants improve groundedness by
declining to answer unanswerable questions more reliably than
Vanilla RAG (Table IV). This opens the possibility that H&S
can enhance the reliability of responses in scenarios where the
model might otherwise be prone to hallucination or guessing.
This result suggests that, for these particular tasks, H&S
provides security against malicious users with minimal
utility impact. We attribute this success to the fact that H&S
forces, by design, a form of chain-of-thought reasoning, by
prompting the model to answer the question in (at least) two
steps. In section X, we discuss cases where we expect H&S
to work well, and applications where it may not work as well.

Fig. 4. Wins of each pipeline in the direct pairwise comparison by the
ComparisonJudge. Ties are omitted.

B. Correctness, relevance, and quality
We now evaluate the pipelines independently via the use of
three LLM-as-Judges, which independently evaluate correctness, relevance, and quality (as detailed in Table I).
Figure 5 reports summary statistics on the number of times
each pipeline received the highest rating out of all the pipelines
(including tied highest). We observe that Vanilla RAG leads
on correctness and relevance, while some H&S variants win
in terms of answer quality.
On RepliQA, Vanilla RAG achieves 97.8% correctness,
followed by H&S Two Steps and H&S Structured at 95.4%
and 95.3%, respectively. On BioASQ, Vanilla RAG achieves
90.5% correctness, followed by H&S Two Steps at 83.5% and
H&S Structured at 82.9%. The BERT-based extractors show
notably lower correctness, as does H&S Span on BioASQ.
These results demonstrate a low utility cost for the defense: the strongest LLM-based H&S methods remain close
to Vanilla RAG on RepliQA and competitive on BioASQ.

Fig. 5. Number of times each pipeline had the highest rating, including ties,
according to LLM-as-Judges.

Fig. 6. Response’s evaluation via LLM-as-Judges on the two datasets, measuring: correctness, relevance, and quality.

Two Steps attains the highest mean quality (5.62, compared
with 5.43 for Vanilla RAG), whereas on BioASQ Vanilla
RAG leads (5.63, compared with 5.44 for H&S Two Steps).
The BERT-based extractors lag behind. Based on manual
inspection of the judge’s explanations, we observe that the
judge tends to demand additional information beyond what is
available in the retrieved document. This suggests the judge is
better suited for rating LLMs on open-ended questions without
source documents, rather than in RAG settings where answers
are necessarily constrained by the retrieved context.
C. K-Precision and Recall

K-Precision

Recall

RepliQA

TABLE III
K- PRECISION AND RECALL OF THE PREDICTED ANSWERS AGAINST THE
REFERENCE PASSAGE AND ANSWER .

Vanilla RAG
H&S Structured Highlighter
H&S Span Highlighter
H&S Baseline
H&S Two Steps Highlighter
H&S DeBERTaV3 (RepliQA)
H&S DeBERTaV3 (SQuAD2)

0.76
0.70
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.63
0.44

0.78
0.65
0.64
0.63
0.64
0.39
0.22

BioASQ

The extractive BERT approaches, particularly when applied
out-of-domain, struggle to identify the most relevant passages.
Figure 6 shows the distribution of ratings from each judge.
We discuss each judge separately.
a) Correctness: Poll Multihop Correctness evaluates the
correctness of a generated answer against the reference answer (binary: True/False). On RepliQA, the Vanilla RAG
baseline correctly answers 13,934 of 14,248 answerable questions, compared with 13,587 for H&S Two Steps and 13,578
for H&S Structured. We observe that H&S DeBERTaV3
(SQuAD2) performs poorly on RepliQA, achieving 2,985
correct answers, likely due to its base highlighter being
fine-tuned for returning short answers rather than extracting
relevant passages. In contrast, the same base model finetuned on a separate split of RepliQA achieves 6,337 correct
answers, suggesting that fine-tuning on in-domain data substantially improves extractive QA performance. On BioASQ,
Vanilla RAG leads with 4,273 correct answers, followed by
H&S Two Steps (3,939), H&S Structured (3,910), and H&S
Baseline (3,793), while H&S Span underperforms (1,789).
The RepliQA-tuned DeBERTaV3 also performs poorly on
BioASQ (1,766), reinforcing that data distribution highly
impacts performance of BERT-like approaches and that more
varied fine-tuning datasets should be used in practice.
b) Relevance: The Reliable CI Relevance metric captures
how relevant an answer is to a question on a 0–3 scale. The
baseline (Vanilla RAG) receives the top relevance rating for
94.7% of answers on RepliQA and 93.4% on BioASQ. The
best H&S results are 83.3% for H&S Structured on RepliQA
and 74.4% for H&S Structured on BioASQ.
c) Response quality: MTBench Chat Bot Response
Quality evaluates responses on a 1–10 scale. For the leading LLM-based pipelines, ratings cluster around 5.4–5.6 on
RepliQA and 5.2–5.6 on BioASQ, with smaller differences
than for correctness and relevance. On RepliQA, H&S

Pipeline

Vanilla RAG
H&S Baseline
H&S Structured Highlighter
H&S Two Steps Highlighter
H&S DeBERTaV3 (RepliQA)
H&S DeBERTaV3 (SQuAD2)
H&S Span Highlighter

0.55
0.37
0.37
0.35
0.27
0.22
0.19

0.44
0.42
0.44
0.44
0.22
0.16
0.18

Table III presents K-precision and recall metrics for all
pipelines across both datasets. Vanilla RAG consistently
achieves the highest K-precision scores (0.76 on RepliQA,
0.55 on BioASQ), outperforming all H&S variants. Kprecision measures the proportion of tokens in the predicted

TABLE IV
P RECISION AND R ECALL FOR DECLINED ANSWERS .
Pipeline
H&S DeBERTaV3 (RepliQA)
H&S Structured Highlighter
H&S Span Highlighter
H&S DeBERTaV3 (SQuAD2)
Vanilla RAG
H&S Baseline
H&S Two Steps Highlighter

Precision

Recall

F1

0.85
0.94
0.76
0.55
0.94
0.60
0.45

0.99
0.40
0.43
0.48
0.24
0.20
0.01

0.91
0.57
0.55
0.51
0.38
0.30
0.03

answer that appear in the reference passage, and these results
suggest that Vanilla RAG tends to reproduce passage content
more verbatim. In contrast, H&S pipelines produce answers
that paraphrase or restructure the source material. The recall
metrics show smaller gaps, suggesting that H&S pipelines
still capture the essential information from reference answers
despite lower lexical overlap.
The gap between Vanilla RAG and the strongest H&S
variants is smaller under some LLM judge evaluations (Figure 5 and Figure 6) than under K-precision. This discrepancy
reflects a fundamental distinction between lexical similarity
and semantic correctness. K-precision rewards verbatim quotes
from the source passage, which inflates scores for systems that
extract and reproduce text directly. However, a correct answer
does not need to share exact tokens with the reference: paraphrased responses that accurately convey the same information
are equally valid.
D. Decline to answer
Around 20% of questions in the RepliQA dataset cannot be
answered based on the provided document. We evaluate how
well the various pipelines declined to answer these questions.
In Table IV, we report Precision and Recall for each
pipeline in terms of declining to answer. We observe that
DeBERTaV3-based models fare well, which is possibly due
to the fact that their fine-tuning considers the no-answer
case explicitly. The H&S DeBERTaV3 (RepliQA) performs
particularly well; this may be partially due to the fact that it
was trained on data with a similar distribution as the test set.
H&S Structured also does relatively well, possibly because
the structured output option helps its reflection process. Both
outperform Vanilla RAG’s F1 score of 0.38, reaching 0.91
and 0.57, respectively, which suggests that some H&S variants
can improve groundedness by declining to answer when the
document does not provide an answer.
Nevertheless, the absolute performance of all the pipelines
suggests there is still significant potential for improvement in
this aspect. This connects to the open problem of teaching
LLMs to say “I don’t know” [54], [58], [59]. Future H&S
implementations should consider either better fine-tuning or
few-shot prompt-tuning to improve on this aspect.
E. Effect of min_words
We measure the effect of enforcing the min_words security parameter on the text extracts from the various highlighter

Fig. 7. Effect of min_words enforcement on the text extracts. It shows what
percentage of text extracts satisfies the security property, for various levels of
min_words. Results on the RepliQA dataset.

Fig. 8. Do we need H&S, or can we just do highlighting (e.g., extractive
QA)? The preference is based on an LLM-based ComparisonJudge that looks
specifically at the relevance and correctness of a response.

methods. Figure 7 shows that pipelines are only minimally
affected by this: the worst affected for min_words = 10,
a relatively large value for the security parameter, is H&S
Structured with 98.9% ± 6.6 of text extracts preserved.
IX. A BLATION STUDY OF H&S COMPONENTS
In this section we evaluate the individual components of
an H&S pipeline, to provide deeper insights into why this
approach can achieve the results presented above. First, we
explore whether H&S is needed at all, or whether a simple
passage retrieval or extraction QA pipeline (i.e., highlighter
without the summarizer) may suffice. Next, we compare our
different highlighter implementations in terms of their KPrecision and Recall. Finally, we study how the choice of the
underlying LLM affects performance. In Appendix C, we also
investigate whether the summarizer can recreate the original
question based solely on the outputs of a highlighter.
A. Do we need a generative summarizer?
First, one may wonder whether we actually need the summarizer in the pipeline. Given the long history of passage
retrieval and extractive QA, a simpler highlighter, which can
be implemented on the basis of an extractive QA model, may
perform well in QA tasks.
To answer this question, we compare the outputs of the
individual highlighters against the response given by the full
H&S pipeline using a ComparisonJudge. To prevent longer
answers from being judged more favorably, we truncate the
responses to 40 words; this is roughly 2 English sentences,

We further evaluate highlighters on a stricter metric: we
count how many times the highlighter’s output is either an
exact match, a substring, or a superstring of the gold passage
(although one should bear in mind that the span of the humanchosen gold passage is somewhat arbitrary). Figure 9 shows
that, in this case, the DeBERTaV3 highlighter that was finetuned on RepliQA has the best performance. We attribute this
to the fact that, even if its fine-tuning was done on a separate
split of the RepliQA dataset, the model may have captured
the style of gold passage selection of the human annotators.
Fig. 9. Comparison of the highlighter’s output text to the human-curated gold
passage in the RepliQA dataset.

which is what the H&S pipeline is prompted to produce. We
run this experiment for the Two Steps pipeline.
As shown in Figure 8, our results indicate that using a
generative LLM (summarizer) after the highlighting step can
lead to substantial improvements. This is particularly evident
on the BioASQ dataset, where the H&S outputs were preferred
in 64% of cases versus 6% for the highlighter alone. On
RepliQA, H&S is preferred in 28% of cases versus 9% for the
highlighter alone, with 42% ties. Based on a manual inspection of the ComparisonJudge’s explanations accompanying its
ratings, the H&S pipeline is typically preferred for its more
“relevant” answers that “directly address” a question, whereas
the highlighter is preferred for its “direct quotes”.
B. How good are the highlighters?
We compare the highlighter variants with respect to the gold
passage in terms of K-Precision and Recall. Since this requires
a gold passage, we only use the RepliQA dataset.
TABLE V
C OMPARISON BETWEEN HIGHLIGHTER IMPLEMENTATIONS WITH RESPECT
TO THE GOLD PASSAGE (R E P L I QA DATASET ).
Implementation
H&S Baseline
H&S Span Highlighter
H&S Structured Highlighter
H&S Two Steps Highlighter
H&S DeBERTaV3 (RepliQA)
H&S DeBERTaV3 (SQuAD2)

K-Precision

Recall

0.85
0.84
0.84
0.82
0.80
0.55

0.66
0.73
0.76
0.77
0.36
0.22

As shown in Table V, LLM-based highlighters substantially
outperform those based on DeBERTaV3, especially in terms
of Recall. However, as discussed in Appendix B, LLM-based
highlighters incur higher computational overheads, which may
be a consideration in practical applications. We did not focus
on optimizing the performance of the DeBERTaV3 models,
and we hypothesize that there may still be scope for further improvement. An encouraging result in this direction is that finetuning DeBERTaV3 for the specific task of long-context highlighting (RepliQA dataset) improves performance compared
to the same model fine-tuned on SQuAD2 (short answers).
Results in Table V also indicate that using structured outputs
for LLM-based highlighters improves performance (Recall).

C. How does the model affect the performance?
Our main experiments used GPT-4.1-mini, a relatively
modest model that works well for simple tasks such as FAQbased RAG. However, it is often the case that newer LLMs
improve the downstream task performance. In this section,
we evaluate H&S pipelines using GPT-5.4 [60]. We use
the same prompts as in the previous experiments, to ensure
a fair comparison; we expect that prompt tuning may further
improve the performance of H&S.
We use the judges described in section VIII. For this
evaluation, we instantiate them with two base LLMs:
GPT-4.1-mini and GPT-5.4, and report performance for
both.
Results show that improving the underlying LLM is sufficient to improve H&S. Table VI, which compares RAG
and H&S independently based on correctness, relevance, and
quality, shows improvements for both datasets. Importantly,
the difference between RAG and H&S shrinks for every metric
and both judges. For example, on BioASQ the Correctness of
H&S rises from 0.83 to 0.91 (0.82 to 0.88 with the GPT-5.4
judge), bringing it much closer to RAG’s Correctness of 0.93.
Table VII shows that the pairwise judge scores H&S more
favorably when built on top of GPT-5.4; in particular, the
percentage of ties (where H&S and RAG are equivalent)
increases substantially. We note that the GPT-5.4 judge is
stricter towards H&S than GPT-4.1-mini: H&S loses more
pairwise comparisons (e.g., 41% vs. 23% on RepliQA with
GPT-4.1-mini generations), and GPT-5.4 rates the quality of RAG’s responses higher than that of H&S, whereas the
two judges’ Correctness ratings agree within 0.03. Absolute
results thus depend on the choice of judge, but the trends
above hold under both.
X. D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
This study of a new design pattern opens up a large number
of research questions and directions to explore. We discuss
some of the challenges that we leave open for future work.
a) Automated checking for adversarial inputs in the
knowledge base: Our threat model assumes a trustworthy
knowledge base. While this is realistic in many real-world
use cases (e.g., QA based on FAQs), it may not be the case in
all RAG applications. Interestingly, H&S makes it significantly
easier to look for threats even in those cases: it (exponentially)
reduces the scope of the problem from inspecting both the
knowledge base and the very large space of possible user

TABLE VI
M EAN RATINGS BY THE LLM- AS - A -J UDGE IMPLEMENTATIONS FOR THE BEST H&S VARIANT AND VANILLA RAG ON THE ANSWERABLE QUESTIONS ,
FOR EACH GENERATION MODEL AND JUDGE . T HE H&S VARIANT IS SELECTED TO HAVE THE HIGHEST AVERAGE OF THE THREE METRICS AFTER
RESCALING TO [0,1].
RepliQA

BioASQ

Correctness

Relevance

Correctness

Relevance

Judge

Model

Variant

H&S

RAG

H&S

RAG

H&S

Quality
RAG

Variant

H&S

RAG

H&S

RAG

H&S

Quality
RAG

GPT-4.1-mini

GPT-4.1-mini
GPT-5.4

Two Steps
Two Steps

0.95
0.97

0.98
0.98

2.77
2.79

2.93
2.93

5.62
5.74

5.43
5.68

Two Steps
Two Steps

0.83
0.91

0.91
0.93

2.55
2.71

2.84
2.88

5.44
6.01

5.63
6.01

GPT-5.4

GPT-4.1-mini
GPT-5.4

Structured
Two Steps

0.95
0.97

0.97
0.98

2.83
2.85

2.96
2.96

5.61
5.99

6.10
6.37

Two Steps
Two Steps

0.82
0.88

0.90
0.93

2.61
2.77

2.86
2.89

6.14
7.02

6.87
7.48

Judge

Model

Variant

T

W

L

RepliQA

GPT-4.1-mini

GPT-4.1-mini
GPT-5.4

Structured
Structured

56%
65%

21%
19%

23%
17%

GPT-5.4

GPT-4.1-mini
GPT-5.4

Span
Span

49%
61%

10%
11%

41%
28%

BioASQ

TABLE VII
PAIRWISE COMPARISON OF THE BEST H&S VARIANT ( I . E ., HIGHEST WIN
RATE ) AGAINST VANILLA RAG BY THE C OMPARISON J UDGE LLM, FOR
EACH GENERATION MODEL AND JUDGE . E ACH ROW SHOWS THE T IES (T),
W INS (W), AND L OSSES (L) OF THE H&S VARIANT.

GPT-4.1-mini

GPT-4.1-mini
GPT-5.4

Two Steps
Two Steps

31%
45%

34%
34%

35%
21%

GPT-5.4

GPT-4.1-mini
GPT-5.4

Baseline
Two Steps

25%
30%

20%
22%

55%
47%

inputs, down to inspecting only the knowledge base. The
system designer can scan their knowledge base for potential
triggers, by inspecting each document via a (sequential) sliding
window based on what the highlighter is allowed to highlight.
Future work can investigate efficient scanning techniques.
b) Additional signals to the summarizer: Future work
can study if any additional information about the question
can be passed to the summarizer without increasing the risk
of attacks. For example, the H&S pipeline could monitor
the similarity between the user’s question and the question
guessed by the summarizer to ensure correctness. In preliminary experiments, we found a weak correlation between the
pipeline’s performance and the summarizer’s ability to predict
the question: Figure 10 shows the relationship between the full
pipeline’s performance and the K-Precision of the summarizer
at guessing the question.
c) Handling Yes/No questions: For some questions, a
simple “Yes” or “No” can be a satisfactory answer. We observe
that H&S can be easily augmented to support such questions,
whilst ensuring the same level of security. For example,
the highlighter can optionally pass a tag to the summarizer
indicating: i) whether the question being asked is of yes-no
type, and if so ii) what it thinks to be the answer (yes/no).
Since both of these fields are of boolean type, they are unlikely
to introduce any new security risk. The summarizer can then be
instructed to augment its answer with this information. Future
work can investigate whether this approach improves answers

Fig. 10. Weak correlation between the ability of the summarizer to guess the
question and the performance of H&S Two Steps.

for this class of questions.
d) Handling multiple questions: In some cases, the user
may ask more than one question in the same prompt. It may
be possible to handle this via system design. For example, the
highlighter can first split the questions that are present in the
prompt, and then have the H&S system make separate calls
to the summarizer. Future work can investigate this design or
other solutions to the problem.
e) H&S and hallucinations: H&S forces the LLM to
answer questions based on verbatim extracts from a knowledge
base, which should intuitively reduce hallucinations as compared to standard RAG. However, it is still possible that either
the highlighter or summarizer could hallucinate. For example,
when faced with an unanswerable question, the highlighter
may highlight sections that are either irrelevant or misleading.
Furthermore, the summarizer may suffer from hallucinations in
its generative step. Future work can investigate whether H&S,
or some variant thereof, can help to reduce hallucinations.
XI. C ONCLUSION
We propose Highlight & Summarize (H&S), a design pattern that enhances the generative step of a RAG pipeline to
provide security by design against jailbreaking and model
hijacking attacks. We evaluate its security theoretically and
against non-adaptive and adaptive adversaries. Our empirical
evaluations demonstrate that our approach has minimal utility
impact compared to standard RAG, and it can even improve
the groundedness on unanswerable questions. Overall, H&S

provides strong security while enabling high-performing RAGstyle chatbots. We also discuss several new research questions
that arise from this design pattern, and encourage their study
as exciting avenues for future research.
